<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-37" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h2>
			<p>In that sharp confusion of forested mountains, with ridges in the clouds, and all based in an inferno of precipice, chasm, and torrent, to the depths of which the sun never reached, it was hard to say where you were, within a few miles. It was no wonder the Malays disliked the heights, and said they were the abode of spirits, and quietly declined to accompany <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parsell on extravagant asides in that menacing solitude.</p>
			<p>They were anxious to work through. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parsell was not. It was hard enough to keep to what trails there were, without adventuring on excursions from which there might be no return; so Colet stood by Mat, whose woodcraft was as astonishing in its intuitions as though the man were aided by another sense. Mat told Colet frankly that his home was by a river in the plains beyond, or else, would a man be so foolish as to do this thing?</p>
			<p>“A man, Tuan, will find his home, even across such as this forbidden ground.”</p>
			<p>All the time they were working through the range, that expression of elation on the face of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parsell, all of him that could be seen one night by the glow of a lamp, would intrude on Colet’s preoccupation with the difficulties of the day. It would return to him suddenly, a fading but troubling wraith, when toiling through the savage undergrowth of a gully; and he would see it, when, hurriedly, Mat and he were scanning the ground above, anticipating, after a storm, the irruption of a flood into a natural trap. Colet had a doubt whether any man should have a light so bright and happy on a face so worn.</p>
			<p>Yet Parsell had come through it well. He could have been counted the best man of the party. He was as ardent as a little flame burning from an inexhaustible source. He was showing the marks of the experience, for the going was arduous and the food was no better than a pretence at eating, but maybe he drew nourishment from the circumambient; nothing else would account for his quiet cheerfulness. Mat, too, had observed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parsell’s unconcern with what, from them, required cunning and fortitude. Mat, who had led them to a spur of the range from which they overlooked an ocean of jungle to which even the sun could set no limit, paused beside Colet, and shook the sweat from his face. He saw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parsell standing contemplating, as though it were a land of promise, that immense estrangement from man below. Mat murmured his wonder to Colet. He asked from what it was that Tuan Parsell found his strength. Colet turned to see, and felt jocular. They had done some good work that day. They were getting on.</p>
			<p>“For he on honeydew hath fed,” he quoted.</p>
			<p>Mat was mystified. “Tuan?” he questioned, in reproach.</p>
			<p>Colet became as explicit as he could in the vernacular. “Allah supports him.”</p>
			<p>That, of course, was quite satisfactory, and Mat glanced again respectfully at the other tuan.</p>
			<p>They rested for a time at that cool elevation. It was not often that they could find an outlook through the dense labyrinth of giant trees and vines, not even for a sight of the sky. They were, in a sense, travelling underground, and in the dark. When they surveyed it from above the jungle was not recognised. That aspect of it, its roof, was foreign. From where they stood then it was a sea of dusky billows arrested in its flow. It was like the sea; it was without bounds. It faded into the horizon.</p>
			<p>Colet was awed by the magnitude of that silent and unexplored prospect. They had that before them. They had that to work through; yet always beneath its surface. That was the roof they rarely saw of the purgatory through which they usually toiled in mire, in a twilight, with thorns and leeches and the dim and questionable. There was that much more of it, to the skyline. The crests of mountains floated in the heavens on invisible vapours, regions detached from the earth. A translated peak would diminish, would vanish, and then another would appear where nothing had been seen before. Colet wondered whether his little party was not only off the map, but whether a map could contain a revelation of what was not only infinite but protean. He felt it was like his cheek, and smiled to himself, viewing his rags and dirt, to chance heartbeats against that universe.</p>
			<p>And what a space in which to search for Sakais, or for anybody! Where were those blessed people of the woods? He would have supposed they were but a legend, a theme for campfires, but that yesterday in the forest they had stumbled on three huts, the most remote and forlorn human habitations which he had ever seen. They stood in a narrow rift of the jungle, which frowned down on the transient and pathetic evidence of man. They were abandoned. He thought their builders must have fled in a horror they were no longer able to withstand. And who could wonder at it? The floor was cumbered with wet leaves and forest rubbish. The day descended that shaft in the forest as far as it could, but it rested on a wall, obliquely, little more than halfway down. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parsell was absorbed by the unexpected discovery, and was in no hurry to move on. Yet nothing was there but the memorials, the sodden leaves, and the coarse webs of spiders across the uprights.</p>
			<p>Mat dolefully shook his head about those Sakais. He himself, he said to Colet, did not know why it should be good to find them, but perhaps Tuan understood. Were they not savages? They were dirty, and they knew nothing. They were infidels, and they knew no shame. They were as the beasts. Why should they be sought, as though they were men? It was certain, Tuan, that they would not be found. They were but shadows in the forest, and moved like beasts. They saw, but they were not seen. They were as timid as deer, and feared men. He himself had hunted them, and he knew.</p>
			<p>“There, Tuan,” he whispered, pointing over the dark sea of the treetops below, “is smoke. It is a Sakais camp.”</p>
			<p>Colet could just discern a faint blue smear some miles away.</p>
			<p>Mat, though, was discreet, even without hope.</p>
			<p>“Tuan, we should never find them. Can smoke be caught in the hand?”</p>
			<p>Colet felt that another outlooker was peering by his elbow. He turned, and saw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parsell beside him, intent on the same sign.</p>
			<p>Mat at once led on down a precipitous shoulder of the hill; and Colet, but for a sense he had that any mishap now would mean the loss of the party, would have admitted that the land was beautiful. Streams hung in veils from upper shelves of rock, were lost, and reappeared under wet ferns and gigantic leaves to brim and shimmer in basins of granite. He paused by one clear spout of crystal, folded the waxen green of an arum leaf into a cup, on which the drops of water were globules of cold silver, and thought it was the best drink he had ever had.</p>
			<p>Near there they camped; and again that night <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parsell sat beside him, and spoke of a light that had been, and might be again for men. Theirs, indeed, was a journey of discovery. This was the true sort of exploration. Colet had little more than coffee and a pipe, and that tenuous confidence of his companion, to support him. The cicadas had shrilled to the last of the sun when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parsell began his lesson; but all was silent, and the Malays were asleep, and the fire down, when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parsell rose, and spread his sleeping-mat. His rumouring voice, hinting at the hidden springs of life, ceased; there was then but a sprinkle of stars overhead, and the night around, which was the forest. Colet could pick out of that silence even the roll of a dewdrop from a leaf. On a distant hill he heard the imperious voice, the snarling moan, of the lord of that region.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
